In the previous section, we already learn
about network automation using paramiko.
Next in this section, we are going to learn
network automation using netmiko.
What is netmiko?
We will learn more about netmiko later in
the next video.
Now we are going to setup the topology first.
Let’s just start, create new project, let’s
say the name is network automation netmiko.
Let’s import the ubuntu server, and then
let’s also import some router,
here we can type shift and then drag and drop the router,
let’s import 5 router.
Okay now we have 5 router, this is router 1,
router 2, router 3, router 4, and this is router 5.
Now let’s connecting all router to the switch.
Let’s also connecting the switch to ubuntu
server.
Remember that in the ubuntu server, the interface
that connected to gns3 is the second ethernet,
so ethernet 1 here.
Ethernet0 is connected to internet, ethernet1
is connected to gns3, and ethernet3 is connected
to the laptop.
If you forget, you can check it in the virtualbox,
here click on ubuntu, and then setting.
In the network section, here we can see that
adapter 1 is nat, this is connected to internet,
adapter2 is not attached, this is will be
connected to gns3, and then adapter3 is host
only adapter, this is connected to our laptop.
Okay done, let’s start all router and ubuntu
server, here we can click on this icon.
Wait for a minute until all router and ubuntu
server is started.
While waiting for all router and ubuntu server
started, let’s create a note for the ip address.
Router 1, the ip address will be 10.10.10.1,
router 2 will be 10.10.10.2,
router 3 will be 10.10.10.3, router 4 will be 10.10.10.4, and
last, router 5 will be 10.10.10.5
Okay now let’s check on ubuntu server, login,
let’s check the ip address.
Here we can see that the ip address of enp0s3
is 10.0.2.15, this ip address is automatic,
because we configure dhcp client on enp0s3
For enp0s8, the ip address is 10.10.10.254,
this is connected to gns3, and last, for enp0s9,
the ip address is 192.168.56.2, this interface
is connected to our laptop.
So the ip address in the ubuntu server is
correct.
Now let’s configure ip address and ssh on
all router.
Let’s show the interface label first, click
on this icon.
Here we can see that all router connected
to the switch on fa0/0.
Later, the configuration of all router will
be same, so we can write the template configuration
on sublime.
Let’s create new file, here we will write
the template to configure ip address and ssh
on all router,
Configure terminal
Interface fa0/0, no shutdown, and then ip
address 10.10.10.1 255.255.255.0,
this is will be for router 1.
And then for ssh configuration
Ip domain-name mydomain.local, crypto key
generate rsa and then enter,
Here for the modulus is 1024.
Next, we need to create username and password.
Username cisco privilege 15 secret cisco.
Last, let’s configure vty, line vty 0 15.
Login local.
Don’t forget to save the configuration.
Do write.
Okay this is the configuration template to
configure ip address and ssh on all router.
Later for router 2, we just need to change
the ip address, the other configuration is same.
Let’s copy this, go to router 1.
And then paste the command here.
Okay all configuration is success, except
in the modulus section.
Let’s edit the template again,
Here we have enter 2 time, let’s remove
this.
Let’s just copy in the crypto key section,
back to router 1, paste,
Here choose yes, and this is 1024.
Okay done.
Now we are done on router 1.
Now let’s test to remote router 1 from ubuntu
server.
But before that, let’s remote ubuntu server
from our laptop first.
Ssh ubuntu@192.168.56.2, okay success, now
let’s try ping to router 1, ping 10.10.10.1,
okay this is success.
Now let’s try to remote router 1, ssh cisco@10.10.10.1,
Okay we get an error here, this is because
yesterday we remote 10.10.10.1,
but now we remote 10.10.10.1 again, but the router is
different.
To solve this, we can just remove this file,
copy this, sudo rm and then paste it.
Now let’s ssh to router 1 again, okay now
this is success.
Now Let’s try ping to router 2, this is failed,
because we don’t configure anything yet
on router 2.
Now let’s configure router 2.
In the sublime, let’s change the ip address
become 2.
Copy, back to gns3, open router 2.
And then paste the command here.
Here we can see configure terminal, configure
the ip address, domain name, crypto key generate
rsa 1024, create username, and configure vty.
And last here we save the configuration.
Okay so the configuration on router 2 is success.
Let’s check it, ping to router 2 first, okay
success.
Let’s try ssh to router 2.
Okay this is also success.
Okay I think enough for this video, for router 3,
4 and 5, you can try it by your self.
You just need to edit the ip address and then
copy paste the command.
In the next video, we are going to start learning
network automation using netmiko.
Thank you for watching and see you on the
next video.